Consider a graph G=(V,E) on which there are some *Minimum Spanning Trees* (MST).

    [illustration showing G]

    [illustration showing some MST in G]

- Let S and S' be two subsets of V that are complementary to each other in V. That is S and S' are complementary partitions of V.

    V = S + S'

    or 
    
    S' = V - S

    [illustration showing two subsets of G.V]

- Let's call K a collection of edges that was built with the constraints that:
    - it should be a subset of some MST on G (i.e. K is a part of some MST)
    - and it should not have an edge connecting a node in S to a node in S'. 

    [illustration showing possible K]


We say that K does not *cross* between S and S'.


- Identify as J all edges crossing between S and S' (that is, all edges having a node in either partitions).

    [illustration showing J]

- Since we already know that no edges in K cross between S and S' and that all edges in J do cross between S and S', then it's safe to say that no edge in J is already a part of K.

- Given that K is made up of edges from some MST (i.e. K is part of some MST), if some edge e is the lightest in J (i.e. the one with the lightest weight), then the union of K and {e} can safely be considered to also be part of an MST on G.

- In other words it's always safe to add to K the lightest edge linking any S to its S', as long as K does not already have an edge linking them.

Proof:
===

Reminder on some properties of trees (also see "Summary on Graphs and Trees")
---
* Property 1: Removing a cycle edge from a connected graph cannot disconnect it.
* Property 2: A tree with K nodes has K-1 edges (i.e. |E| = |V|-1).
* Property 3: Any connected, undirected graph G=(V,E) with |E| = |V|-1 is a tree (i.e. any connected, undirected and acyclic graph is a tree, since a tree can have at most |V|-1 edges).
* Property 4: An undirected graph is a tree if and only if there's a unique path between any pair of nodes. If there were more than one path, they would form a cycle.

- We started by positing that K is a part of some MST. Let's call T that hypothetical MST.
- We want to proove that the addition of e, the smallest edge crossing between S and S', to K will maintain the status that K is still part of a some MST. That MST might still be T or it might not.
- If we say that e is a part of T, then adding it to K keeps it as a part of T and the status holds and our proof is done.
- Now let's consider the implications of the alternative, that is saying that e is actually not a part of T:
    - what is implied in that situation is that adding e to K would eliminate K as a subset of T, but would now make it a part of some other MST. Let's call that hypothetical other MST T'.
    - it also implies that T has an edge, other than e, in J that connects its two subsets in S and S'. Let's call that other edge e'.

    [illustration]

    - let's imagine that T' has the same elements in S and S' than T, but in J instead of e' it has e. 

    [illustration]

    T' = T U {e} - {e'}

    - let's call w, a functions that returns the weight of an edge and W, an equivalent function that returns the weight of a set of edges, we get
        
        W(T') = W(T) + w(e) - w(e')
        
    - Let's call dw the difference in weight between e and e'.

        dw = w(e) - w(e')
    
    - Having picked e as the lightest edge in J we know that w(e) <= w(e'), thus dw <= 0, and 
        W(T) + dw <= W(T)

    - which implies that

        W(T') <= W(T)

The above relationship is important because it proves that replacing any edge from an existing MST that crosses over two *disjointed* subsets (sets that have no elements in common) of the graph with another smaller edge still yields an MST. Which in turn implies that gradually gathering such small edges is a recipe to find an MST. 

